B002
B002 is 30 years old. I had previously seen B002 12 years ago after she had had previous treatment. She had orthodontic treatment from ages 14 to 18, a splint 15 years ago, TMJ surgery 3 years ago, and physical therapy beginning this year. The onset of her TMJ problems was at the age of 13 of unknown etiology but likely AICR. Primary concerns that B002 has at this time include the following:

Pain.
Headaches.
Appearance.
Tight muscles in the neck and shoulders.
Difficulties eating and chewing certain foods.
B002 rates her headaches at a level of 7, but they can escalate to a 9 and the headaches occur predominantly in the posterior head area and migrate forward to the temporal area. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, but can escalate to 9 and her average daily pain is at 8. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 3, disability at 5. She gets earaches on the right side, occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo. No other joints bother her. She has some seasonal allergies. She has no known allergic reaction to jewelry. She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at nighttime and also during the day. She has mild snoring, moderate daytime somnolence. She is not aware of sleep apnea issues. She has a moderate sleep disorder at night and she is predominantly a mouth breather at night.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B002 has fairly good left-to-right symmetry. Upper lip length is about 2 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline. She does have a slight cant to the occlusal plane with the right side up about 1 mm more than the left side. In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is at least 3 mm posterior to subnasale. The maxilla appears to be retruded by 6 to 8 mm. The chin is retruded by about 20 mm. The chin neckline and chin neck angle are not well defined. Intraorally, she is missing two lower incisors and has the rest of her teeth back through the first molars. She has retained primary E and mandibular right second bicuspid. She has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the first molar. She has small upper lateral incisors. She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side with the first bicuspid and on the left side she is Class II end-on. The mandibular dental midline is actually shifted off to the left side about 1 mm. In this position, she has Class I cuspid on the left side or a full Class II cuspid if we use the lower first bicuspid as a cuspid and she is Class II end-on on the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal, although there is a decreased distance from the soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall, probably most likely due to retruded maxilla and mandible. The nasal airway demonstrates relatively hypertrophied turbinates causing significant airway obstruction. Part of this may be due to significantly decreased transverse width of the nose. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles, TMJ, right masseter muscle. She has some crepitus in the right TMJ on opening. The maximal incisal opening is 46 mm, but she could open to about 35 mm without significant pain. Excursion movement to the right is 7 mm and the left 4 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that she has had previous double jaw surgery. She had bilateral sagittal split osteotomies done and she has bone plates in position. She has a very prominent notch in the right gonial angle area. She has four bone plates in the maxilla. She has severe arthritis in the temporomandibular joints. Turbinates appear quite large, although the sinuses appear relatively clear. The right bone plate has an inferior portion with a hole in it that extends down below the inferior border of the mandible and it is palpable beneath the skin.

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are quite enlarged. Sinuses are clear. Septum is reasonably straight, although a little deviation off to the left side is present.

Axial view shows that the turbinates are large and appear to block most of the airway. Sinuses are relatively clear.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there is severe condylar resorption present and the condyle has lost significant vertical and anteroposterior volume. The condyle is actually sitting forward in the fossa. The articular eminence is relatively elongated, but just has a moderate inclination. There is increased superior and posterior joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle significantly resorbed with loss of vertical and anteroposterior dimension. There is significant flattening across the head of the condyle. There is soft tissue thickness, particularly posterior to the condyle, but also superior to it. The articular eminence has a slightly lesser inclination than the opposite side, but still is somewhat elongated.

Left TMJ coronal view shows severe arthritic changes have occurred in the joint. There has been significant loss of vertical dimension and there is medial beaking of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa is flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has significant resorption that has occurred and appears to be to a greater extent than the opposite side. There is some medial beaking of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 1 to 2 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B002 has a very high occlusal plane angle and retruded maxilla and mandible. Oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted with an airway dimension at the base of the tongue of less than 2 mm. At the soft palate level, the AP dimension is about 8 mm.

Basic diagnosis would be:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis (secondary to AICR).
Maxillary AP hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. Missing mandibular central incisors and all four second molars and all four third molars.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
Class I cuspid on the left side, Class III cuspid on the right side, but occlusion is relatively stable in its current functional position.
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Previously placed hardware bilateral mandibular ramus area.
Large bony defect right inferior border of the mandible.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). e.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. f.	Removal of bone plates from mandible. g.	Synthetic or bone graft to right inferior border of the mandible.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
